everybody welcome to impact theory
you're here my friends because you
believe that
potential is nearly limitless but you
know that having potential is not the
same as actually doing something with it
so our goal with this show and company
is to introduce you to the people and
ideas that are going to help you
actually execute on your dreams all
right today's guest is hard to fit in
the box he's the executive director of
the flow Genome Project and has been
tapped to help unlock employee
performance by fortune 500 companies
such as Cisco Nike Google and Red Bull
but he's also well versed in mystical
experiences and Burning Man growing up
he took huge risks as an adventure
athlete willing to risk everything for
those fleeting moments where he was
outside of himself and free of the
monkey mind but realizing how dangerous
and clumsy of an approach that actually
is he and partner Steven Kotler have
committed to delivering the elusive
state of flow from the world of hard to
reproduce mysticism to the world of hard
science by mapping the genome of flow
with scientific rigor by 2020 this
endeavor has already made him the
recognized expert in the four trillion
dollar altered states of consciousness
economy and turned him into a much
sought-after speaker and consultant on
the neurophysiology of ultimate human
performance you had me at ultimate human
performance his work ranges from
advising high-growth companies and hedge
funds to running expeditionary
leadership courses and helping optimize
the most elite warriors on the planet
half of the things that I came across in
my research I had to look up to fully
understand and every new thing I
encountered made me feel like this guy
is the ayahuasca spirit guide for an
elevated and optimized daily life please
help me in welcoming the co-author of
the relentlessly intriguing book
stealing fire how Silicon Valley the
Navy SEALs and maverick scientists are
revolutionizing the way we live and work
the Midwife of transient hypofrontality
himself Jaime
Weil
welcome thanks for having fun good to
see you again
good to see you as well very good to
have you on the show
I don't normally start with diving into
terms and defining things but I have a
feeling where we're going to go but the
end of this interview is going to get
pretty interesting maybe a little
esoteric so why don't we start with what
are the states of altered consciousness
sure I mean all the altered states of
consciousness just means anything other
than waking normal and so that can
include everything from dreams to
visions to schizophrenic states a whole
broad swath in our book stealing fire we
actually kind of narrow that down and we
focus on what johns hopkins psychiatrist
stan grof called non-ordinary states of
consciousness and under that we zeroed
in on three big categories so meditation
and mystical states and in this case you
know classical sitting meditation the
kind of thing that people are familiar
with but then also any of the states
that are produced by dancing by movement
by sexuality buying these days smart
tech you know whether it's little things
on your phone or more complex devices so
any of those states flow states which as
we've discussed you know those moments
of in the zone performance again
typically fast and athletes and then
psychedelic states and there's been this
recent renaissance and sanctioned
research in you know chemicals that
interact with our neuro chemistry and
produce very very pronounced and fairly
persistent different or altered states
of consciousness so that's those are the
three meditation flow and psychedelic
states under which we then had to kind
of come up with a bigger name or term
and since since the baby boomers and
kind of hippies kind of ran a lot of
them into the Bahamas we're like okay we
can't use any of that language we have
to wind the clock all the way back so
let's go all the way back to word
origins back to the ancient Greek and we
figured okay X tosses which in the Greek
is to antecedent for the word ecstasy
which if you sort of get beyond the club
drug references it sort of just means
literally that which moves us beyond
ourselves right so non-ordinary states
are those that typically take us out of
everyday waking consciousness where I am
self aware and haven't
in turn aerated going on to those states
beyond that and then there's a whole
host of additional qualities we can talk
about you've likened the intern era t'v
to our inner Woody Allen yeah I found
that yeah that's exactly what it feels
like right someone who is essentially
heckling you within your own life yeah
which is painful to know that it's
coming from your own mind which how much
do you know about like what they've done
with severing the corpus callosum and
creating literal duality in people's
minds yeah I mean I think that's some
Sam Harris in his book waking up talk
about that I think it's one of the
fascinating parts of that book and I
think that's a gives us a great you know
just empirical kind of a be testing on
what do we think of as ourselves and to
what extent is our consciousness or
conscious waking pot the pot that could
point to stuff and name it and call it
out actually calling the show and
actually neuroscientist David Eagleman
who's a dear friend of ours and on our
advisory board he teaches at Stanford he
in his book incognito and several of his
others he makes that great case he was
like look basically our conscious mind
is no more than the headlines on the
Sunday decide if you know compared to
the entire week's news and so that fact
that what we think of as ourselves and
what we're actually in real time able to
name point out and talk about is you
know a percent at most of all the data
we're experiencing all the sensations
and inputs is you know fascinating and
or terrifying depending on your point of
view and potentially liberating because
if we can get access to more of that bit
stream and we can integrate it into our
choices our decisions and even our
inspiration we have access to a lot more
bandwidth it's like going from dial-up
to fiber-optic and hoppy is that why
this has become sort of your life's work
I mean I think maybe on a sort of like
cognitive level and I'm like an
intellectual level but really it's it's
become my life's work because I just
realized it's the only thing that makes
me tick it's the only thing that gets me
up out of bed in the morning we haven't
we have a sort of inside joke special
rule the flow Club you never talk about
flow Club like don't talk about it go do
it live it shut up video like and so for
me I just realized I'm a lazy
unmotivated bastard when it comes down
to it yummy ball
and so I just noticed and I'm like wow
and then I noticed everybody else to
which was it felt like we're drowning in
information and we're starving for
motivation
so like new ideas about you know ten top
ten list sickles about how to live
better or be more productive and all
that kinda stuff
I think there's business sort of false
promise there because like that's not
the weak link the weak link is do I have
enough Drive in myself to do these
things and if we can unlock intrinsic
motivation and we can unlock that I
can't help but go do this because it
fulfills me and we can connect that to
long term development then I think we
got something much more potent and
potentially transformative than post-it
notes or affirmations talking about the
four trillion dollar economy that's
grown up around people's desire to mess
with their own bearing chemistry yeah I
mean this is kind of a crazy story
actually because we had mapped the you
know the neurobiology of the first day
we're gonna have bet the genome of the
flow kind of part of our organization
and so we realized ah when you're in
21st century normal it has a very
consistent signature it's a beta
brainwaves its prefrontal cortical
activity a lot of kind of just
fight-or-flight stress hormones but
they're just kind of left on slow drip
so norepinephrine and cortisol are hot
not surprisingly are hot check our heart
rate variability is kind of all over the
place
jaggedy look like the stock market
instead of a nice sine wave right our
postures are often hunched our
respiration is partial and shallow poor
air exchange cooled up co2 brain's not
getting fully oxygenated like there's
this kind of predictable stack and when
we feel like most of us feel most of the
time it looks like that under the hood
and alternately in these non-ordinary
states all of that stuff shifts and it
shifts kind of you know to the right at
least on a sort of nominal two-by-two
shot of it and it becomes slower brain
waves for theta
it becomes I'm deactivated or hiker
activated brain activity in different
regions lighting up and turning off it
requires
neurotransmitters that flush out the
stress chemicals and replace them with
reward and feel-good chemical dopamine
endorphins and and amide
kinds of things respiration tend to
become more rocks and belly resyncs you
get better air exchange posture tends to
follow shoulders relaxed and fold back
head about you know head above shoulders
all these kind of like wow so that's an
interesting signature and what we
realized was this actually applies not
just to flow States this applies to
meditative States this applies to other
mystical emvu states this applies to
psychedelic station we realize okay now
we've got almost a rosetta stone you
know you remember like back back in when
I think of Napoleon's era they
discovered that tablet that had Greek
demotic Greek and Egyptian hieroglyphs
all saying the same sentence all in one
place so they could translate them they
could decode the grammar of it right
right and that unlocked access to these
languages that had been hidden well you
know and that that genome of flowed that
came out of rosetta stone and it led us
I'm not we were like oh well you know
slow state with a domain of artists and
athletes and meditative States with the
domains of you know mystics and
meditators and all sort of things you
know pious folk monks and then
psychedelics were sort of hippies and
rainbows right and none of those
communities would ever talk to each
other they'd walk past each other on the
street and not bat an eye and we're like
what wait a sec actually your practice
is the doors you're going through all
completely different but the place
you're getting to remarkably similar
right so as soon as we had that insight
went okay well let's see are we full of
it is just a hypothesis that doesn't
bear out and we said let's let's
actually do a hard economic analysis and
let's take a look at how much time and
money are people spending seeking those
those states that profile that signature
right
and so we backed into it and we took a
look at the obvious licit and illicit
pharmaceuticals so everything from
alcohol tobacco nicotine all the way
over to you know legal and illegal
marijuana all the way to on and off
prescription pharmaceuticals oxycontin
painkillers psychiatric meds that whole
neck array that was over two point two
trillion dollars all right just just
alone and then we went into you know not
just compounds that we can ingest to
shift our states but the entire
psychotherapeutic self helps they helped
me get coached me or teach me to get out
of my weight waking state consciousness
feel happier
and that was billions long then we took
a look at immersive media the idea of
immersive media I mean we talked about
IMAX we talked about even just binge
watching
right I mean Netflix has done all their
algorithms and the idea of even the fact
that the next show pops up before the
last ones finishes like they write code
it is and they've even found that like
comedies aren't that good for binge
watching but what is a serial dramas so
that's why house of cards like given
because I'm now hung up on a cliffhanger
right wait to have the dopamine hint of
the reward of the next thing and I'll
stay up I thought I was going to watch
one and go to bed six of them later it's
3:00 a.m. and I'm still going to go for
that last time a bit to get my payoff
right so so those are all the categories
and we realize like IMAX you know giant
40-foot screens huge subwoofers right
the ability to be in the dark
I've lost not unlike a sensory
deprivation tank I lose the boundaries
of myself I'm connected to other people
who are you know booing and gasping and
clapping and cheering the sound you
George Lucas right famously said and I
said movies a 50% audio right and so
huge sound huge screen we travel further
we pay more for those tickets we don't
just stream them at home or go to our
local Cineplex so that's a state
shifting choice we pay a premium before
and I said something about that you were
like we don't go that far out of our way
and pay the additional premium for to
see better movies we go there to feel
something more yeah I mean that that's
that's the premise or payoff of imax
like lose yourself more right right it
for two or three hours project under the
screen Marin neurons all the kind of
thing I mean our brains are
evolutionarily wired to distinguish
between what's on the screen and what's
we're actually perceiving through our
own eyes why that there's initial silent
movies with the train coming everyone
bailed out of their seats right so
that's that's the premise of IMAX
binge-watching we just talked about and
you know that notion of it gets out of
hand like I planned one I ended up
watching eight right that's that's a
sign of the narrow camp happening
streaming pornography is a great example
because if you think about it why do we
do it
there's no evolutionary payoff if I
succeed at watching :
but I do not propagate the gene pool one
bit alright but what I do do is I create
a state of pronounced physiological
arousal right and an ER and a state of
sated neuro chemistry that I find
peeling right and if you think about
that one you know like there's there's a
book called salt sugar fat by Pulitzer
prize-winning New York Times Washington
basically talks about how the food
industry has hacked what they call the
Bliss point oh yes right and they living
every day schemed for and this is why we
have chilies and TGI Fridays and the
Cheesecake Factory right and they
basically figured out that salt sugar
and fat were both very all three rare
sensations salt the central mineral you
can only get it at salt licks in certain
places sugar you know was only available
in berry season for two weeks never
refrigerators no shipping like two weeks
of berry season or honeycomb and that
was it right and fat easy to spoil right
so anytime it's in our evolutionary
issue we had access to that stuff it was
just like the signal which is get as
much as you can while you can right and
now we can't stop we can't turn it off
so you get to Krispy Kremes between a
bacon cheeseburger and that's a thing I
think that exists about anything okay
and not people lose their minds right
and and and and so and seventy percent
of that American men are obese right
phrasing right and so and so you put
sexuality in that same category right of
food water sex 3-prime primary
evolutionary drivers and now we have
untapped access to perennial e sexually
available mates with no contest from
peers right because we provided access
to all this stuff now in ways that we're
never ever available right people have
no checks and balances anymore so the
ability to massively overshoot the
market in pursuing these stage is
absolutely there it's a clear and
present danger so all things also we
need checks and balances I mean I think
the evidence would suggest that without
them if we just provide unlimited access
to the things that you used to have
natural herbs and flows you tend to get
you tend to get excess and you tend to
get addiction destruction and
destruction that's talked about drugs so
here's an I'm soup I'm a total wuss
about drugs so I don't do drugs
I tried smoking weed I [__] hated it
I drink but super occasionally like I
just don't mess exogenously with my
neuro chemistry very often I'm terrified
of psychedelics but I'm so intrigued by
what lies on the other side like
one do you think it's it's a I'm going
to say necessary doorway is it a massive
accelerator and why should it or
shouldn't it be more readily used by
people okay that's a bunch of question
that's a lot of okay so so I mean first
things first if there's a premise for
our book at all that I would want people
to take away it's that the door matters
less than the destination okay right and
so what aren't some doors going to be
easier than others some and yeah I mean
we even talked about it in one of the
later chapters which is like literally
the expose this equation because people
always ask us what's the best way yeah
trucky I'm going to list a question like
this way and we like look man it depends
it depends on your time frames your risk
tolerance my time frame how long I have
to get into yeah like I mean because you
could if you wanted to say hey on
risk-averse right I have all the time in
the world right and I want the safest
surest way I'd say dedicate you know
respiration practice and contemplation
go forth and have fun right and see me
in ten years if you're like I am
desperate to have some meaning like
let's take for instance a specific case
study of Iraqi vet who's suffering from
PTSD yeah perfect right so like you've
got time time money and excess and you
can choose your path and your risk of
this go learn to meditate right yeah I'm
not sure if I can live another day in my
mind yeah the way it is then Stumbler
interventions may be necessary and in
fact maps the multidisciplinary
Association for psychedelic studies has
been doing federally profound federally
sanctioned research with trauma
sufferers so it is it's you know war
veterans as well as sufferers of child
abuse and sexual abuse so folks who life
has happens to them in ways that are
unfair unsustainable and the burden of
that wounding is literally killing them
and in as little as one session with
MDMA and for those folks that don't know
that that's that's the core
pharmaceutical ingredient and what folks
often know as ecstasy or Molly and when
you ingest it interact with your
serotonin
and it also reduced it also releases
dopamine and oxytocin so you've got
serotonin dopamine and oxytocin coming
into your system and it tends to leave
people feeling it particularly if they
have been traumatized they can relax
they can feel safe they can feel secure
and they're basically having the ability
to go and revisit those traumatic events
in ways that don't trigger their nervous
system into fight-or-flight again and in
conjunction with skilled therapeutic
talk therapy the ability for that to
release them I mean in fact one it
actually it's been so successful it's
been screwing up their stats because
they fess the mass as they do this
research because the protocol was for
three sessions to stretched over six
weeks by six months and you know there
was there's been more than one one or a
few buddies like I did one one session
I'm good Wow save my life I'm not coming
back MDMA yeah in conjunction with out
there talk therapy but very surprising
very structured Johns Hopkins University
is doing studies NYU is doing studies
UCLA is doing studies and maps the
multidisciplinary so mats org you can
check in on those websites the good news
is is that their evidence has been so
overwhelmingly powered it pronounced
effective that the FDA is approving it
not just for trauma but also for anxiety
and depression and that's now in stage
three clinical trials I believe like how
does the brain rewire that fast yeah I
mean I think that's a great question and
it doesn't just happen at the short
answer I don't know why or how it does
but I would say that it does and it's
not just pharmaceutical intervention so
the MDMA trauma stuff actually if you
wind that story back it first began in
1990 with Willoughby Britton at Brown
University and she was studying NDE
survivors of near-death experience books
and she's like look I'm a trauma I'm a
trauma researcher when people are
traumatized that's usually a bad thing
for them right but people who have had
the kind of tunnel of white light
breakthrough epiphany moments come back
and the thing that should have
traumatized them actually leaves them
happier than ever and she measured that
with time it takes to get into REM sleep
and this is just an interesting notion
so back to your point about like a
conscious mind shells I didn't realize
there was something
out of this oh my god it's crazy they're
like back to the initial like conscious
minds just the top 1% yeah you can test
how long does it take me to go and fall
into REM sleep at night and predict with
clinical accuracy whether or not I'm
gonna be depressed six months from now
Wow yeah so like I won't even feel
depressed yet six months now I'm going
to be in the dumps feeling it the world
of at me and I don't like my
relationships and my job sucks but six
months earlier you can tell me that by
hate it's taking you you're dropping the
REM sleep too early so basically less
than 100 minutes less than 60 minutes if
I drop in the realm total clinical time
I'm going to be depressed and not how
fast we fall asleep I know how fast you
go into real and once too soon or I go
into realm actually the more that that's
more of a risk factor the longer yeah
the longer it takes me to get into REM
so here's the fact is that ninety ninety
minutes is about average NDE survivors
were clicking it over a hundred two
hundred and ten hundred twenty minutes
before they dropped it around and brain
scans were shown that their neurology
their neural networks were permanently
rewired as a result of that singular
cathartic experience so you're like what
is going on so so the obviously the
trouble with NDE studies as you can't
repeat them in a lab she come nearly
kill people to see if cool stuff happen
yeah right so so roland griffiths at
johns hopkins had them sort of slightly
more elegant solution so like well we
can't leave them n DS or accidental roll
of the dice that we can't schedule that
and how do we find more people that are
truly facing mortality right and how can
we recreate this in some way so he
basically took terminal cancer patients
and introduced three grams of psilocybin
it was enough that people got to an
interesting place but not so much that I
had to manage wild and wooly experience
right and and you know for four out of
ten reported it being the most
meaningful experience of their lives
period just straight-up
most meaningful thing I've ever done and
I think seven or eight out of ten said
it was top five and the results were
persistent for one month three months
six months basically as long as they
grow so they don't know why don't people
do more like Steve Jobs right for real
though like that would be my question so
be and that is the reason that I don't
do it because my assumption is that the
answer is because that [__] is dangerous
right that there's one of the chapters
in your book is called burning down the
house
we stole fire from the gods and ghosts
amazing stuff with it but we can also
burn down the house yeah and so I guess
it fascinates me with drugs because if I
knew it we're safe I would do it so
where is that like critical threshold
why isn't anybody and I was going to say
Steve Jobs said everyone should do it
once but you didn't say everyone should
do it weekly or daily right so what is
it that makes people back off well I
think there's this you know what we've
several different things or one less we
got to just refine our chance because
drugs is a bit of a clumsy category
right so we're not talking about
amphetamines we're not talking about
cocaine we're not talking about opioids
and heroin and any other I think we're
talking about a credibly specific and
refined subset of psychedelics of which
them you know most of the ones we're
talking about interact with the
serotonin system specifically okay okay
so that specific category right is
fairly unique in its properties right
and though and may have and has some of
the benefits as well as known issues
that you have to be very mindful of but
they're not physically addictive there's
very low ability to physically overdose
any of those kind of things are not on
the table for this specific category
right right that said there are you know
state sanctioned states of consciousness
they're always happening right and
whether it's you know whether it's way
back in the days with a Catholic Church
you know in fact even like Neolithic era
right if you look at early cave sites in
Western Europe you have boned hemp seeds
and mortars and pestles for opium for
poppy seeds right no alcohol the alcohol
complex if anthropologist cannot call a
cultural movement began around the
Mediterranean or even those Old
Testament stories like Noah and
fermented grapes and all that kind of
stuff right so alcohol complex began
there and funnily enough fueled a
warlike and romantic bunch of people
that migrated out of the Mediterranean
and the alcohol complex kind of took
over Europe in interesting ways right so
we and for some even today but a smoke
break the coffee break and happy hour
right we enforced those even though on
considered rankings of most harmful
substances that are broadly used alcohol
is number one it taught it beat ternal
and heroines number two I do yeah yeah
yeah
alcohol it is social harm social
absolutely no question about it
ethanol other than the fact
so deeply enculturated we love to raise
the glass and there's all these
wonderful and but Julian's amounts of
film TV or advertising that reinforces a
ethanol is anyone looking at the brain
while they're doing the cycle what
exactly so so Robin kahan Harris
Imperial College of London is just in
the last three years started using LSD
with patients to put them through fMRI
so now I can precipitate the experience
with world-class measurement devices
right and what he found was two things
really interesting so the first was is
that our ego when people talk about ego
disintegration you like practitioners
there was actually right like our egos
not there's not a single spot where it
lives it's a network and if you knock
out even one or two of those nodes the
whole thing we powers down and when
you're shutting down the prefrontal
cortex is that it's subtler and more
nuanced than that in these days and
that's that's what's so cool like the
new tech is advancing and our ability to
put people in right interesting states
while under the measurement devices
because these are big giant
million-dollar machines the first thing
is that the ego is a network and that
destabilizing we're knocking out even a
couple of nodes will shut the whole
thing down you'll get that moment of
selflessness Woody Allen goes away that
stuff but the other and this is goes you
know goes back to why sediments micro
dosing was so interesting is that is
that under those under those conditions
right while your brain is actually a
belies a neurotransmitter LSD around its
secretary and the serotonin is happening
you're getting connections between parts
of your brain that normally never talk
to each other what creates that
connection so it's not going to be
myelination right it happens too slowly
so what what is the mechanism there well
I mean I think in that literal sense is
probably near accomplice and it's
probably literally the serotonin system
there's a cup several different objects
I just and region firing and talking to
each other and they normally don't right
so it's more like skip level neighbors
calling out the window right and it's
like and those far-flung connections I
mean that literally is the mind
expansion element and it's super
practical see this is the thing it's not
just like oh wow I've never thought you
know that I didn't bet a tree that an
oak tree comes from an acorn you know
mind blown you know it's like it's like
can I work on real hard stuff it's in my
life that has practical applications
real-world constraints and can i
navigate some of the things that the
patentable stuff that came out of that
like are there or gauge linear
Tron beam accelerators like like
hardcore super high-tech stuff yeah and
of course I mean that's the day those
guys still doing it that's my real
everybody doing under Stalin line in
Silicon Valley when we go up there and
we speak to teams of engineers and we're
like here's flow States and here's ways
to manage your day and they're like hey
man our whole engineering team for micro
dosing what do you think about that I'm
like really like uh we talked about this
off-campus so you know so the bottom
line is like yes Silicon Valley has just
exemplo or Emblem a lot of this stuff
there's there's a lot of executives that
using transcranial magnetic stimulation
so that yeah right that doesn't freak me
out exactly so I recommend IMS to
everybody that's interested it cuz it's
like okay if you are risk-averse tell
people what that is
so transcranial magnetic stimulation it
almost looks like one of those the
mirrors you know there's life that
dentists have in their offices you know
and you can line it up over the front of
your brain and you and it basically
sends magnetic pulses through whatever
part of your bring you target in my
typical way they do is they kind of test
it and then making it like you just end
up with a sort of natural response so I
grab your thumb and they're like okay
now it's over the right zone and they
just do 15 to 20-minute sessions on a
daily basis and it basically just defrag
your cognitive hard drive and it's FDA
approved for depression okay which is
what they obviously largest target
market let's go ahead and go through
those hoops and it performs it like 70
it's too active effective is Prozac and
it's basically like a month-long
protocol now not that many insurers will
pay for it so spendy listening to 20k
for a batch that's prohibitive but a lot
of people are using an off-label and so
what they're finding is that is that by
basically kind of pulsing it with
magnetic activity and then look sort of
level setting all of your neuronal
connections when they power back up it's
almost it's like a cold you know it's
like a hard reboot on your computer
that's been all very long you end up
with cleaner pathways and connections
and greater efficacy so that's being
used off-label by a lot of executives
it's also being used by colleagues about
how do they shut down it depends but one
of them is dorsal lateral prefrontal
cortex so you can absolutely target that
and other colleagues of ours to join
DARPA research right target acquisition
and snipers archery all these kind of
measurable things how long does it take
you
they're using it to basically
mechanically induce a flow state yeah so
rather than saying hey you've got to
roll the dice or spin the tumbler and
get lucky they're just saying hey sit
here one session you've got 20 to 40
minutes where you're not going to be
your normal self right and go crush it
and see how fast you learn stuff in the
acceleration and learning in those
instances with up to 400 nine percent
what was the name of the company that's
doing that advanced brain monitoring
it's been one yeah for sure
give their stats on how much faster you
can learn the language it goes from like
six months because we weeks yeah yeah
that's crazy so what what are they doing
in the brain to get you in that state
and why does it allow you to learn so
much faster because reading that in the
book I was like Jamie and I are going to
this place they're going to zap me and
we're going to learn something really
really fast and nothing else I want to
advance my Greek yeah
so let's go yeah I mean the simplest
thing that those guys have been doing
and you can do this a thousand or one
different ways but is just straight-up
EEG feedback so electrical activity and
can I can I steer myself without twenty
years of meditation practice right so
biofeedback on Wi-Fi in my waves then
can I just use visualization of my
actual real-time data to help me learn
to control it faster yes is the short
answer
right right so can I move out of
distracted boss moving beta into
something slower and more receptive like
Alpha Theta have you seen people give
themselves into gamma states oh yeah yes
and in fact exceed in meditation to
bettan lineage monks have a far higher
spike in gamma than almost anybody else
and gamma waves for the folks that don't
know that's like your Eureka insight
that's the moment of like Shazam I got
it and I just read a paper in plus one
the journal which was three different
types of meditation and comparing the
incidences of gamma frequency based on
the different actual meditative style so
they're not just like Ken have you done
and not just ten and metadata can do it
but like now which unique traditions do
it better and so the idea here is that
by you know you can either do it the
old-school way there are decades of
practice flying blind but with or with
you know lineage instruction right or we
can accelerate it now we can say hey can
I use additional contemporary tools and
tech and can I accelerate my feedback
loops
can I start doing it faster or once I
can do that it's not that you know the
you know that I should have just gained
access to information I haven't learned
or earned but it is to say that I can
put myself into the most receptive and
accessible state possible to then go and
do that you think it's more important
that that it's learned and earned versus
just being able to zap yourself or take
a drug like for me the idea of Shaving
thirty years I don't care if people
think it's cheating
oh yeah Cheers yeah yeah and that's said
that's another one we know you asked
like why doesn't everybody do this in
your own case the question is about
pharmacological supplementation but
these days it's getting into text
supplementation it's getting into VR and
AR right the question is is you know
what we talked about is the notion of
the skinbag bias the idea that like if
it's inside my body and I've earned it
that's real and true and if it comes
from outside it's cheating or shortcut
and not real yeah and the answer is just
really you sure that that because the
unit it's sort of like you know
basically the moment you slow that down
you're like okay so where's the edges of
that argument you realize there are no
edges it's arbitrary and subjective and
its cultural Inc it's culturally
ingrained the realities are is we are
clever monkeys making [__] up all the
time and we're forever influencing
ourselves right right you go to Boulder
and it's like goddamn Lake Wobegon you
know you look at a Montessori class in
Boulder and like all the kids are just
perfect and beautiful and then you see
the mother and the father and they're
all like five twelve climbers slash pro
cyclist slash Mountaineer PhD they
self-selected right we all do this we do
it casually and informally and then we
also do it deliberately with you know
with what we eat we're tall you a tall
down five five hundred years ago we
won't we're constantly modifying
ourselves all right let's get really
crazy have you read involving ourselves
no my friend like you have to read it so
a big part of their whole thing is that
natural question doesn't exist anymore
it is purely unnatural selection fifty
percent of the Earth's dry land mass is
covered by things that we have decided
to let gross yeah that's wheat corn
whatever in we've decided that we've
decided what species live and die we're
looking at ways to like bring back a
woolly mammoth through cloning it's like
literally as we have taken over natural
selection what we've done
to humans with the way that we impact
our microbiome our biome even just a
Syrian birth and how much it impacts the
child head size yeah yeah having bigger
head smaller hips having kids later
every five years over thirty five I
think that a woman pushes back having a
child it's a 14 percent increase in the
likelihood that child would be obese the
heavier you the heavier the mother is
the more likely the child is to be obese
so it's like you give these generational
facts they're talking about how
epigenetic factors so changes we make to
our own environment to ourselves now can
echo for four generations which is
[__] crazy so if you take a rat that
is feet and then make them smell almond
then do nothing else right one rat that
secede made him smell almond his
great-grandchildren will still be
freaked out by the smell of almonds yeah
yeah yeah yeah but you're not only one
freaking out about that like that's what
like that is crazy so we have completely
taken this stuff over so get at all
triggered to me because this whole
notion of whether its internal whether
it's external a I don't think that we
have grips on now what is internal and
external whether it be height
intelligence or whatever that we're
already sort of taking control over and
breathing in and out got this and math
you were to say but that's essentially
what's happening but now we're going to
be taking over from a technological
perspective from a chemical perspective
and what are we going to be okay with
altering right what do you think so in
fact let's really get controversial my
friend what do you think about
performance-enhancing drugs well I mean
the short answer is we've always been
using them right so you go back you get
back to the 1900s and the you know the
early revival of the Olympics they would
do they would they were marathoners
we're having glasses of wine some of
them are taking that McDonald's of
cocaine that would help yeah sure I mean
it's always been happening right I mean
the the the ink that Incans had that
highway that ran the strip of the Andes
was like eleven or twelve hundred miles
they would have their runners used
basically freeze-dried literally leave
it out of night and pound it
freeze-dried potatoes and other stuff
and coca leaves and those sons of
[__] would like the Pony Express on
steroids they could cover eleven hundred
miles in four days Wow yeah back
Wow what yeah that's crazy so let me
just just absolutely out hand so the
idea that there was some earlier pure
state where none of this happened and we
didn't modify anything is a is a fiction
even go back to oh we use too much
technology we've been wounding the
hurting the environment we need to get
back to mother even the notion of just
the primal old-growth forest is a
fiction
so I mean fire has been used since
Neolithic times by humans as a
technology it's arguably the most potent
technology we've ever invented so when
Europeans came here in the 1600s and
they're like oh my gosh there's game
everywhere in this puck puck like forest
we can ride our horses through and all
of it no no Indians have been managing
that landscape to promote game you know
basically game husbandry for millennia
before you guys showed up so the idea
that there is some earlier purist state
is a pipe dream and a false premise
we've always been modifying our
environment we've always been modifying
ourselves we've always been modifying
the plants and foods we eat Michael
Pollan calls of the botany of desire
right that we shape our plants and our
plants shape us okay they make us feel
and even including intoxicating plants
they make us feel good therefore we make
a time we grow them we help them have
sex we help them propagate right so it
is it is us we are clever monkeys with
opposable thumbs and always have been
but the notion of where is it going next
because anything guys accelerating like
we're doing it master zero ravaging and
like VI even just take vo as an example
let alone like epigenetic manipulation
and the kind of you know pick your child
kind of stuff but like even just V I
mean there's been studies now they're
showing that people are getting VR
hangovers when they take it off and it's
interfering what does that mean well so
it's so like a the first thing that
people notice in the VR is like oh this
is weird and there's this lag and I get
a little seasick and then they're
improving latency and it's going to get
better but that's that was the first
thing but now enough people are doing it
and doing it spending enough time in it
that they're actually what's happening
when people are spending a lot of time
in it and taking off the headsets and
there's psychological depression there's
a sense of like the world is just flat
and gray and I'm not like a superstar
avatar sling and laser beam yeah right
so this kind of sucks and I mean stuck
in traffic and you know and my lunch is
late and also like neurobiological so if
like my visual system has been a
changed this simulated environment but
I'm not getting vestibular at inputs I'm
not getting proprioceptive input that's
all coming into my retina and then I
take that off my cerebellum is out of
whack and people are literally getting
sort of a hangover effect it's almost
like when you've been on a boat too long
and you get back on the pier and land we
legs
land legs people are getting like three
D legs when they come back into waking
state reality so the question is is I
mean are we going to end up just jacking
ourselves involuntarily to the matrix
right instead of being in prison there
ourselves
so here's my big fear have you read the
comic DMZ oh all right so my mission in
life is to get people to understand that
[__] comic books contain like so much
cultural wisdom because you don't have
to actually produce it right you could
do a hundred billion dollar budget movie
and you just drawing right so whether
you're drawing someone sitting in the
living room or you're drawing something
at the cosmological scale it it does not
matter right so they explore fascinating
idea and the DMZ explores the notion of
the u.s. in the middle of its second
civil war and it is so unnerving now to
read it now it came out like probably
ten years ago maybe a little bit more
and at a time I felt a little insulated
from anything like that but now it's
getting a little bit crazy
how does what you guys are covering in
dealing fire because I think it does
touch on the divisive nnessee not just
here in the US but broader like how do
we use the technologies to transcend
that yeah I mean that's that's a massive
fascinating question and this is the
simplest is to say like these techniques
of Ecstasy which is Mircea Eliade
expiration of a chicago way back when
but the notion of like technology or
tools we can use to create a prompt
excess or to step outside ourselves
right right those can be used back to
that you know 1984 brave new world split
they can be used to for our the better
angels of our nature
they can help us become more expansive
more creative you know heal trauma
prompt cooperation collaboration and
innovation or they can use be used to
absolutely hijack our impulses and
drives push all of our pleasure-seeking
buttons sell us more [__] you can
believe us fat and happy and stated on
the cat
right the option is up to us it's kind
of like in Star Wars I don't mean like
100% force Yoda awesome
80% force and it can scary as hell so so
any night like x tosses that 80% could
be pretty much whatever the hell you
want it to be right all right fully
expressed it has these innumerable
positive benefits so one of the
questions you know there's thought that
old Yates lines from that time the
Second Coming which kind of speaks a
little bit to your dmg comic which is
that you know the best lack all
conviction while the worst are filled
with a passionate intensity great qua
right that shows that's really yeah what
miss shapen beast its hour come round at
love lurches towards Bethlehem waiting
to be born
Wow and we have the ability through X
fascist to literally step beyond
ourselves to have these experiences of
expanded perspective to have these
experiences where we just get out of our
way and we see man we are connected to
each other man love beauty truth or
worth taking stands for basic decency
like there should be no reason why we
can't reclaim honor courage duty
sacrifice patriotism democracy friending
it that is this is not about left and
right this is about fear or love right
and I think if we think where we are
today like you can make a case you have
to buy into it but like things are
accelerating a lot of people experience
that and it feels like everybody's
mythologies are starting to smash and
crash into each other alright
one group saviors the other groups
Antichrist okay and it's all happening
literally like the may tree if you go on
YouTube and you google Maitreya the
world teacher which is the Buddhist
world teacher like there are Christian
fundamentals that are absolutely
convinced that a it might have been
Obama be the Maitreya is actually the
Anti Christ in drag right you're like
what is going on you know you've got the
matrix and you've got star wars and
you've got you know banning the alright
you got I exist you've got all these
rail and imaginal narratives all getting
swell [__] down the drain of time and
space and they're starting to slam into
each other and blend in them and merge
in a way that's overwhelming us because
we literally don't know whether to [__]
or go blind and the reality is is like
what is all of that is just the skin
of it doesn't matter what flag you're
flying it doesn't matter what uniform
you wear the real separation is going to
be are you coming from a place of love
or you're coming from a place of fear
and control and these abilities to step
outside ourselves the abilities to see
more feel more and no more is a chance
to get the best some of their own
conviction that's where we are it's like
to have that courage to say enough
enough with the insanity enough within
humanity and it's not it's not can I can
I rip out it's not can I skate for my
life and my Sean's abilities it's can I
just set my downline bird and long
enough to step up to the high ground to
step up to the mountain and look around
and say I see where we are and I see
what needs to be done and it doesn't
matter whether I get the prize it
doesn't matter whether my part is
insignificant or pivotal it's just that
I have to play it and if we all do that
it's the tiniest little thing that to
smile at the grocery store right is it
not to a neighbor it's a conversation
from a liberal to a conception saying we
both care about the same things let's
honor democracy let's honor each other
this isn't complicated and the ability
to get beyond false schisms into a a
solution where you can hold more than
one perspective that is what it's does
this gives us it gives us the ability to
wake up to what's possible to grow up
and Men where we're broken and to show
up and do that which needs to be done
how do we get there at scale well every
day there's a short answer and there's a
longer answer but I think it's
fundamentally open sourcing these
techniques of Ecstasy we have the key
through our cage these days right we
have the ability to you know get rid of
neurotic Woody Allen we really do like
that that imminently possible we don't
need to burn a lot of cycles wondering
if we can but the keys to our cage are
the keys to the kingdom it's the same
thing and so and so yeah meditate I mean
all the smart tag all the neuroscience
all these access points all the
information is here don't die wondering
go find it
find it with the fastest cleanest safest
method that works for you but go find it
and then let's go back to being people
and let's go back to mending this world
I have one more question before you but
first where these guys find you online
well I mean the simplest right now is
stealing fire book.com and our goal is
to get this information out to everybody
that needs it and really helps support
an open-source revolution in
consciousness and culture this stuff has
always been mediated by middlemen and
gatekeepers and that's the most
interesting thing right now it's not one
spot because it's not one Prometheus
we're all Prometheus now and by having
this information and sharing it that's
my biggest hope and I mean I've run all
the scenarios I think there's a lot of
ways this doesn't work and I think the
one way I can see it is a small band of
dedicated rebels all right doing the
impossible just in time that's awesome
all right you've almost certainly
touched on it but put a fine point
what's the impact you want to have on
the world I mean I think it's it's
sharing knowledge that people can use to
wake themselves and each other up and
live its fullest like possible without
apology or compromise I like that a lot
Jamie thank you so much for coming on
the show today man that was incredible
guys you're going to want to dig into
this man's world when I first
encountered him the first thought that I
had was this is the real life most
interesting man in the world the deeper
that you go into the things that he's
thinking about the ways that he's
explored we're gonna have to bring it
back because I didn't even get like 10%
of the things that I wanted to ask him
you've got to hear and talk about
relationships is unbelievable we will
get to that at some point but guys wow
that was an incredible message you're
going to want to read the book stealing
fire it goes into detail the
neuroscience the house the wise the
where's about how you can actually
achieve the stuff the dangers what
awaits on the other side all of that
stuff which I
being warrants further exploration it is
such an intriguing book I promise with
every page you turn you can be drawn
farther into asking a question you don't
necessarily have to agree with the
answer but the argument that they're
presenting I think is pretty undeniable
that as Jamie said we have the ability
to step outside of our egocentric
universe and really see things afresh
and whether that's to be able to have a
breakthrough in your own business or
whether that's to be able to see some of
the political stuff that we're dealing
with in a new light to be able to see a
new way forward it doesn't matter those
are all the things that are contained
within the universe that can be affected
whether it's just straight up meditation
or whether you're braver than I and you
take the psychedelic route but it's all
there to be explored so boys and girls
if you haven't already this is a weekly
show so be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care everybody thanks so much for
joining us for another episode of impact
Theory if this content is adding value
to your life our one ask is that you go
to iTunes and stitcher and rate review
not only does that help us build this
community which at the end of the day is
all we care about but it also helps us
get even more amazing guests on here to
show their knowledge with all of us
thank you guys so much for being a part
of this community and until next time be
legendary much
[Music]